[THEME MUSIC]
>> REGINA MEREDITH: Christopher
Bache is a hero for our times
in my humble opinion.
I don't think he intended to be.
But his persistence
and courage in seeking
to know the
unknowable has left us
with the documentation of
the mind of the universe,
at least as best
as any human being
could possibly articulate it.
Welcome, Christopher.
>> CHRISTOPHER BACHE:
Thank you, Regina.
Pleasure to be here.
>> REGINA: It's so good
to see you in the flesh.
I've interviewed you
on my site and we've
had a book club over
your book, and now it's
time for the Gaia audience to
learn about you and your work.
And truly, eyes
don't say that, I
don't say that lightly,
but what you chose to do,
and we're going to have
you set it up for our Gaia
audience here in a minute,
is nothing short of heroic
because it took
so much diligence
and it was so
painful, and yet you
kept going back and back
because you had to know more.
So let's go ahead and set it up.
We've talked about
entheogens in the past,
we have other hosts who
do shows on entheogens.
This to me seems to be
an order of magnitude
like I've never heard before.
So let's talk about who
you were as a young man
in the beginning of
this journey using
LSD to explore the
mind of the universe.
>> BACHE: Yeah.
Well, I had just
finished graduate school.
It was 1978, a long time ago.
I met the work of
Stan Grof who had just
started publishing his books.
And I immediately
wanted to get involved.
And so long story short,
what I ended up doing
was 20 years of exploration
using high-dose LSD
sessions following the protocols
that Stan had established.
So we're talking about a
sitter very carefully arranged
privacy--
>> REGINA: Real protocols.
>> BACHE: All standard
protocol, eyeshades,
it's totally isolating in what
I call the kiva of practice.
And then I just
basically, for me,
every session is like a deep
exploration of one's own mind
until eventually one drops
out of one's mind, drops
into the mind of the
universe and then exploring.
As a philosopher, what I
was mostly interested in
was cosmological exploration.
How far can we push
these methods to explore
the deep structure of reality?
And that's what I spent
these 20 years doing.
>> REGINA: Well, you were
also a professor of theology.
Were you looking for God?
>> BACHE: [LAUGHS] I started
this work as a deeply convinced
agnostic.
I had basically outgrown
religion through my studies.
And I was atheistic-inclined
to agnostic.
But then when one
begins to confront
the reality of the consciousness
of the universe, I mean,
God comes back into
the picture but not God
as we have classically
defined it, but a living
conscious reality that is
much, much larger than any
of our conventional
understandings of God.
>> REGINA: So now, we start at
the beginning of the journeys.
So you say in your book and
you say right off the bat,
do not do this at home.
You do not recommend people
taking those high doses of LSD
that you took.
You pushed it, you had a person,
your wife, who you trusted,
who also was a professional
in the field of psychology
that could handle
what was going on.
And so you pushed it, you
really wanted to get out there.
>> BACHE: I pushed it because
I had a number of false
assumptions at the beginning.
I thought this was about
clearing personal karma
and I knew that if I worked
with larger doses and sessions
would be more intense but I
could clear the karma faster.
What I did not
realize at the time
was that it's not
about personal karma.
It's when you work with very
high levels of any psychedelic,
you open up to vast
territories, far
beyond anything to do with
your personal landscape.
So what begins to be active is
the psyche of the human species
as a totality.
And then moving beyond
that, one enters
into levels of conscious
reality that transcend history,
transcend time.
>> REGINA: So now we go to the
time when you start on these
journeys and you're first
confronted with the notion
of letting go of what
is commonly called--
I wouldn't even say
classically-- commonly called
ego, which is a very
misunderstood thing
to begin with.
So I'd like to know
about the journey
and about your understanding
of what ego actually
was so we know what
happened when it was gone.
[LAUGHS]
>> BACHE: Well, for me, ego is
simply our body-mind identity.
It's the unit of
consciousness that
organizes all of our time-space
experience in this incarnation.
And I think ego gets a bad rap
in the spiritual literature.
>> REGINA: Agree.
>> BACHE: Ego is a beautiful,
beautiful phenomenon
but it's limited.
It's cut off from
other human beings.
It tends to be cut off from
the very fabric of existence
itself.
And so if you're
going to open up
into vast expanse of spiritual
territory, everything which
keeps you focused in your
personal world has to be
surrendered, has to let go.
And so if you're going to swim
in the deep waters of the ocean
of consciousness, you have to
let go of your small territory.
And so you go through
a process of surrender,
either gently or convulsively,
where you basically
let your individual
identity die or you
are forced into letting go of--
>> REGINA: It sounds
like in your first one.
You were just deconstructed.
>> BACHE: [LAUGHS] Radically.
>> REGINA: --deconstructed.
>> BACHE: I mean,
the universe after--
>> REGINA: Your first trip.
>> BACHE: Well, the first
trip was that, yeah,
I could not remember
anything about me.
I could not remember my
name, couldn't remember--
I couldn't remember what sex I
was, what I did for a living.
And that was the
universe saying to me,
you're not in control
of this adventure.
Let go, we're in control
>> REGINA: Well, when you
finish that up, you thought,
what was I thinking even
starting this whole thing?
>> BACHE: And that could I
die without really dying?
Could I go through ego
death without really dying?
And it's a genuine
profound death.
It's a much more excruciating
death than physical death
because when you
die physically--
>> REGINA: You're still you.
>> BACHE: --your
consciousness continues.
But here, you are
physically alive
but your organizational
identity is destroyed.
And after two years
of work, the way
it destroyed mine is
it basically turned me
into the exact
opposite of everything
I had known myself to be.
So I'm a male, I'm
white, I'm a philosopher,
I'm passionately concerned
about the meaning of life.
It just negated all of
those things that turned me
into women, lots of
women, women of culture,
women who are not educated,
who are not concerned
about the meaning of life.
And the problem, of course,
wasn't women at all.
It was that my identity was
white male, philosopher,
and it just snapped it.
It did not give me-- it
gave me no opportunity
to experience life except from
within the lives of women.
First, I fought it.
I was scared.
When I let go, then the
most wonderful world--
>> REGINA: You were-- it sounds
like you were originally aghast
and kind of appalled.
You dropped into the way women
were chatting and functioning
with each other over
things that seemed
so supercilious to a
professor like yourself.
>> BACHE: I know.
Yeah, but the issue
is it just wasn't me.
This was not me.
And it was like the universe was
saying, where you were going,
gender does not exist.
Let go.
So I had to let go
of my male identity.
I had to let go of my
professional identity.
I had to let go of
all of those things.
And when I did, then I was
taken into the first level.
I was taken into
the world of women
under the arm of
the great mother.
And was shown,
allowed to experience
100,000 of women's lives
in a life-changing journey.
And this was just the
first of many journeys.
>> REGINA: So in terms of
coming back from those journeys,
that journey as being a
woman, as giving birth,
and part of femininity,
what was, say,
the biggest gift of that to you
in your waking time after you
came back from this journey?
>> BACHE: It sort of changed my
way of operating in the world.
I was very analytic,
trained as a philosopher,
early as a historian, I was
very kind of argumentative
in my strategy.
It was about really
an aggressive posture
to find out what was
true and analyze it.
And it softened all of that.
It basically put me in
touch with a gentler way,
more intuitive way.
I mean, I didn't lose
my analytic skills
but it gave me a gentler way
of working with those skills.
>> REGINA: And as you
went on, you started--
well, the word "excruciating"
comes up a lot in the book.
These were excruciating
sessions a lot of times
because not only
were you dissolving,
you were going through
a continual death.
It's almost like Groundhog
Day except I'm dying again.
You kept dying and dying, and it
felt like actual death to you.
>> BACHE: Yeah.
>> REGINA: Actual death.
>> BACHE: Until death
eventually becomes your friend.
>> REGINA: And you start
looking forward to dying.
That I found a
fascinating turning point,
but that's a little
later in the story.
So before you start
looking forward to it,
you're going through these
multiple excruciating deaths,
but you went through
one in which you
witnessed the suffering
of many, many children.
So this is following
on from the experience
of being a woman to
the experience of being
the feminine losing
our children to all
these essentially
male agendas of war,
in particular, competition.
And tell us a little bit
about experiencing the deaths
of all these children.
>> BACHE: Let me say initially
that I've learned over
the course of many years
that I am truly a servant
of the mother.
I feel myself very much aligned
with the feminine quality.
I'm a man, I like being a man.
This is a deeper level.
I serve the work
of the great mother
in her work in the world.
And she is the mother of
all life, all life forms.
After I finished-- after I
went through the ego death
experience, I had a
particular experience
that I call the killing of the
children in which I experienced
thousands and
thousands of children
being killed by soldiers,
just being smashed, just
being destroyed.
And I became an oriental
woman trying to stop them,
beating on their chest
trying to stop the killing.
And they just brushed me aside
and kept about their work.
It was excruciatingly painful.
And this was a transition
I learned later
to the next phase of my work,
which was entering into what
I call the ocean
of suffering, which
is a vast territory, a
collective territory, a residue
of human history, of human
suffering accumulated
through history.
All the wars, all
the terrible things
we've done to each
other, all the droughts,
that all these trauma live
within the collective psyche
just as individual trauma live
within the individual psyche.
The killing of the
children was an experience
that was designed to awaken
what the Buddhists would
call "bodhichitta," the desire
to save sentient beings.
For me, it was
awakening a soul desire
that I had taken on to work
to help ease and end the anger
and suffering in existence.
So that I very
self-consciously put myself
in between all this
raging, killing, terror,
and the children of
unborn generations,
and engaged it in
a way that I was
conscious of trying to
absorb it and impact it
so that it would not be able
to reach future generations.
>> REGINA: And that is where
we're headed as a species.
We are going to see
the end of war in time.
>> BACHE: We have to.
>> REGINA: We will.
We will in time.
And we're having things
forced in front of us
the last few months
to watch the killing,
massive levels of killing of--
killing of children
were the world
is just sitting
numb and appalled
and not knowing what
to do with what's
happened, with the loss of
so many children's lives
and every mother, every
person can feel now.
This doesn't work anymore.
>> BACHE: Yeah.
>> REGINA: It never did, but
now we're aware enough through
being able to tap into media
sources and news sources.
We have exposure to it, which
we didn't have in ancient times.
So now we all see this
ocean of suffering.
>> BACHE: We all watch it.
Yeah.
>> REGINA: We're seeing it.
So then you pass through
the ocean of suffering,
which is beyond the children.
It's almost like
the disembowelment
of the entire species.
They really-- these are
many sessions in now--
they really took you
deeper and deeper
into the nature of
what we collectively
hold in our greater mind.
>> BACHE: Yeah.
>> REGINA: All of the suffering.
And when you finally hit the
ocean of suffering, I mean,
most people would
say, I think I'm going
to call it quits at this point.
So tell us about that and
what happened for you?
>> BACHE: Well, you have
to understand in this type
of work, as I experience working
in psychedelics the way that I
did, the first half of every
session is spent in some type
of purifying or
death experience.
And that reaches a
culmination where
there is a sacrifice,
something you're
asked to give up, something
you're asked to do, you do it.
And when that
happens, you're spun
for the remainder of the session
in ecstatic blissful states
of learning.
So there was repeated
excruciating experiences.
But at the end of the second
half of every session,
there was great joy,
there was great learning
that was given to me.
So I did this.
I stayed with the
work not because I
was a glutton for
the pain, because I
was a glutton for the
ecstasy and the bliss
and the teaching that was on
the other side of the pain.
So it was always balanced.
This is all part of a
cycle that you learn,
a cycle of purification followed
by illumination, initiation.
So death followed by rebirth.
And that's a repeating pattern
in the cycles as it is in life.
So I went into the
ocean of suffering.
I stayed in it for two
years, but I was also
given many blessings
during those two years.
Deep initiations
into the universe,
how the universe is structured,
mystical experiences
of returning into deep
experiences of oneness that
underlie our physical
diversity, going back
to the beginning of
time and experiencing
the birth of the universe
from a cosmic perspective.
These are deeply
touching experiences.
And the killing of the children
and the ocean of suffering
are simply something you do
because it needs to be done.
>> REGINA: Well, you needed
to understand the depth of it,
the complexity depth,
multidimensionality of it.
And I mean, but on the
other hand, as a human,
you'd come back
and your wife would
see this pale, damp, limp
human being that took weeks
to recover from these sessions.
It took so much out
of you physically.
So you did get the
blessings and the knowledge,
but still it took a
lot out of your body.
And at one point, she said,
why do you keep doing this?
Are you a glutton
for punishment?
And you felt you
could not back down.
You had to go through
this to take one
for humanity for the
direction of our future.
>> BACHE: Well, I don't know
that I would be that heroic
in my self-description.
To me, this was an exploration.
This was an adventure.
People use psychedelics
for many different reasons.
Today, very strongly,
the most common one
is therapeutic healing,
very important.
Another one is
spiritual awakening.
For me, my work was an adventure
in cosmological exploration.
I wanted to know how the
universe is structured,
why is there so much suffering,
where are we going, what's
the fundamental-- what's the
underlying structure of reality
itself.
This was an opportunity
to explore these things
experientially.
No price is too great
to pay for this type.
So there was
tremendous intellectual
and spiritual nourishment
along the way.
>> REGINA: Understood.
Nonetheless, you finally
said, OK, I'll stop.
And you stop for six years.
>> BACHE: I did.
>> REGINA: At her request,
you stopped for six years.
I think she was having
a hard time handling
your physical suffering.
But--
>> BACHE: She asked me
to stop and I stopped.
>> REGINA: And you
stopped for six years.
>> BACHE: Yeah.
>> REGINA: And then
when you went back,
the shocking part of that
story, you didn't miss a beat.
They picked up exactly
where you left off,
whoever was guiding this
remembered where you left
off and picked it up again.
And then you start moving
into the cosmic tree
of life, the fundamental
nature of reality.
The basis of the building
blocks of reality,
which in hermetics they refer
to as kind of logos and prima
materia, just that
field, the chaotic field
that you can imprint
with word or thought
to begin the creation process.
And that's where you went.
Can you talk a little bit
about the fabric of our reality
underneath everything?
>> BACHE: So beautiful, so
extraordinary beautiful.
When you let go of
your personal existence
and when you let go of even
your historical existence
or the existence of yourself as
a member of the human species
and fall deeply into
the nature of reality
itself or the reality
behind the reality,
like the Plato's prisoner
escaping from the cave
and entering the domain which
you just experienced as more
real than time and space, and
more ancient, just ancient
beyond measure and more real.
And then being given, taken
on journeys where you're
shown how this works and
shown how reincarnation works
and shown the fundamental
oneness that's
living and breathing and pulsing
inside the diversity of life
as the diversity of life for
a higher purpose within life,
bringing a fruition within
life, these are great blessings.
Hard to summarize.
>> REGINA: Well, it'd be
hard to even articulate.
>> BACHE: Yeah.
Yeah.
>> REGINA: But I think
you just did a great job.
So from there, you went on to
of dying into oneness which was
another quite painful incident.
But I want to break
through that because this
starts moving into karma.
And then you had, like
you said a moment ago,
and I'm having my notes, you
had reached an ancient reality
that was more real
than everything
you understood about your
own reality right now.
And that took you out into
the cosmos ultimately.
Session 26, which I found
absolutely fascinating,
and you're still
struggling to find
the exact right terminology.
You met with beings
that were so vast.
And this is how you wrote
about it in the book.
But you say it's
still not adequate.
You saw that these beings
create through humanity,
live through humanity, satisfy
themselves through humanity.
And so of course, we wonder,
who, what are these beings?
What is the nature
of these beings?
How did it feel being
in their presence?
Was it a thing that felt
frightening in you serious?
Or was it just something
that's companionable and that
were maybe only an extension of?
>> BACHE: Yeah.
This is a challenging portion
of the journey to describe.
When the ocean of suffering
came to a culmination,
there was an orgy of suffering
that then the process completed
itself and I was spun into
a higher level of reality
and I entered what
I came to understand
as archetypal reality.
And my first encounter
with archetypal reality
versus tremendous
energy is like going
through volcanoes, burning
suns to escalate the energy.
Every deeper level
of reality functions
at a higher level of energy.
And to enter into
archetypal reality,
you have to make a huge
transition in just energy
to attune, to survive
the energy of that level.
When I went into that
reality, I encountered--
and I don't know whether to
call them beings or principles,
they're not beings in any
way that we can usually
imagine them.
They were so large and
so vast, the only way
my mind could envision
them, could see them,
the best approximation
it could give
was to see them as galaxies,
hundreds of billions
of light years across.
>> REGINA: Very, very conscious
with their own directive
and experience.
>> BACHE: I didn't even get that
much of a penetration to them.
What I saw was these
massive principles,
massive beings completely beyond
my mind's ability to grasp.
And they were the
beings responsible
for creating space and
time, and for creating
some of these
fundamental structures
within space and time.
So the basic
cosmology that emerges
is everything emerges
out of a primal one.
The one manifests a series of
cascading levels of reality.
It's a pretty
classical and standard
sort of spiritual cosmology.
There are many
intermediate levels
between the one and
physical existence.
One of those levels are some
of those levels are archetypal.
They are the
constitutive principles,
these constitutive
spiritual beings
or principles which are
responsible for manifesting
layers of reality beneath
them into time and space.
And so there's a sense in which
we participate in their being.
We are part of their being.
Not in any small sense, but
in a massive cosmic sense.
And I did not experience any
infringement on my freedom.
I did not experience any
manipulative intent or anything
like that that would
compromise our life.
I think I simply
was experiencing
what has always been the
case, and what's always
been the case is that our
physical lives are embedded
in a spiritual
cosmology that has
many levels and many
gradients of being.
And once you begin
to be aware of it,
then you begin to think,
oh OK, that's how it works.
That's how it's going on.
And that's a
relaxation into that.
>> REGINA: That's so beautiful.
So looking at what
you just said,
the architects of time and
space and other constituents
or the building blocks of
reality of life itself.
So could we say
that they perhaps
were the progenitors of things
like geometry, color, light,
sound, and all of
that along with it?
>> BACHE: Could be.
>> REGINA: As building blocks
that create this reality that
our mind interfaces with and
somehow assembles and trying
to imagine the assemblage
at that level was
incomprehensible.
>> BACHE: Very similar to
Plato's archetypes ideas
in the mind of an eternal God
except they were not ideas
in the mind of an
unchanging God.
They were not unchanging
eternal ideas.
They were vast living
dynamic principles
that were moving
inside time, inside--
>> REGINA: And moving
through us, it sounds like.
>> BACHE: Moving through us.
>> REGINA: It says, creating
through us, living through us,
loving through us,
experiencing through us.
>> BACHE: Yes, on a completely
different order of time,
completely different
order of magnitude.
It's just a different
order of scale.
And that's why it
feels much more real.
It is more real
than time and space.
It is ancient compared to the
short time-- time and space
that has been in existence.
So you have to acclimate to
live in that reality for hours
at a time and to go back
into it and go back into it.
You have to acclimate to it.
And then after some
time in that reality,
I went through another
death and rebirth
sequence that catapulted me
into yet a still deeper level
of reality.
>> REGINA: Share that with us.
>> BACHE: Well,
that took me in--
I describe it in the
book in a chapter called
"A Benediction of Blessings."
It was a year of just
incredible blessings
and I describe four
particular sessions there,
an experience of
what the Buddhists
call shunyata, emptiness
of self, no self to be.
In a reality where
there is no self here,
there's no self there, there's
no self anywhere in the world.
The world is living and
pulsing as a singular being.
It's a single being.
And when you experience that
profound level of oneness,
then it's just
immediately obvious there
is no separate being, myself is
not separate from this oneness.
Myself and this oneness
interpenetrate profoundly.
And the world lives
and moves as one.
And the image that came through
for that particular session
was the forest.
The forest is filled with many,
many different types of tree
but there's a single life
force that moves through them
all, doesn't care
whether it pines
or oaks or sycamores
or anything.
It's just a single life force.
An experience of cosmic
love, just an extraordinary
overwhelmed sensation of
being loved by the universe.
An experience of
the primal void,
just having an experience
where deep enmeshed
in the universe and the
universe just began to be erased
and entering into
the primal void
before the manifestation
of physical existence.
And then one particular
session in what I experienced
is the birth of
the diamond soul,
which is teaching me
where reincarnation
is taking humanity.
>> REGINA: And that's
where I wanted to go next.
So you say there is no such
thing as being apart from this.
We're all a part of it.
But let me just go
ahead in the framework
before we go into reincarnation.
Set that up as individuated
consciousness, soul
consciousness.
This is how you
define it in the book.
"A story of individual
consciousness
ultimately sourced in
the creative intelligence
of the cosmos, systematically
moving back and forth
between the physical universe
and a surround metaverse
in a long journey of
self-development."
I think that's one of the
best descriptions of soul
that I have ever seen.
And the beings that I am part
of call us a soul development.
They literally call
humanity a soul development
because it's constantly in the
process of still developing
as the unique hybrid
species we are.
So let's say that.
Now, we go to reincarnation.
We're individuated in this
vast sea of consciousness.
And let's talk about the
notion of reincarnation
from where you understood
it, and the notion
of purification
through reincarnation,
and of collective tribal
historical periods of time
reincarnating together.
>> BACHE: Yeah.
Well, I had written my first
book, it was on reincarnation,
and it's kind of a classical
book on reincarnation.
It begins with the
evidence but then
it basically integrates
traditional spiritual
understandings of
reincarnation, which basically
mean that we live,
we die, we return
to some type of
spiritual existence.
We incarnate, we get small,
we die we go back to soul.
We incarnate, we keep this up.
And in that process, we
live and change and grow.
We challenge ourselves.
We go through all
sorts of stages.
But basically in the
traditional vision,
the story culminates in
enlightenment, some type
of spiritual awakening.
And once one has that awakening,
once one knows who one is,
what one is, that we are a
divine being, in essence,
then moksha, escape.
Then we leave the planet.
We-- nirvana-- we
no longer incarnate
inside time and space, which
means that time and space is
basically just a training
ground that we want
to leave and
participate in some kind
of extraplanetary
spiritual paradise.
And my experience
was that wasn't true.
>> REGINA: Yes, I
found that fascinating.
Go ahead and talk about
what you did find.
>> BACHE: What I found, I went
through one particular session
where all of my former lives
began to come back into me.
It was like winding a kite
string around a kite spool.
They were coming in very
quickly and they reached a point
where they fused into one,
all of those former lives,
thousands of years of
experience fused into one.
When they fused into one, there
was a tremendous explosion
of diamond light
from my heart, and I
was thrown into a state of
consciousness that was deeper
than anything I had been into
up to that point in time.
And I was giving a long
series of teachings
about reincarnation
that went on for hours.
And the basic vision is it's
not about achieving realization
and then leaving.
And it's not even about
just achieving realization,
the fusing of all of those lives
into a singular intelligence
which is individual like ego
but not structured like ego,
much, much larger,
deeper, much more porous,
and in constant communion
with a larger surrounding
consciousness.
That being is soul incarnate.
I call it the birth
of the diamond soul.
People refer to it
in different ways.
I think we are going
through a process of history
where we've been
incarnating and we've
been developing for thousands
and thousands of years.
We're coming to a point where
the human species can no longer
afford the luxury of
being as ignorant,
being as small as
we've been in the past.
We must wake up.
And the form that this
waking up takes, I think,
is the birth of the
diamond soul in history.
The soul is literally
becoming incarnate,
literally heaven is coming
down into Earth in our bodies,
and is continuing to
evolve our bodies.
Not just opening our hearts
and opening our minds,
but literally changing
how our senses operate.
>> REGINA: And you actually had
an experience of that as well.
>> BACHE: Yeah.
>> REGINA: And OK, so
let's move from there.
I love the fact that you got to
this point of this, A, oneness,
which was an
interesting realization.
Yes, we're part of something.
But so many people believe
in the spiritual communities,
in general, also that
in Christianity you
sit on the right hand of
God and you live forever
in this wonderful
cosmological heaven.
In other systems, you go into
the sea of oneness and now
you dissolve into one--
into oneness.
And that's it.
That's the end.
What you found out is that's
not it, that's not the end.
And the way you
said it, it does not
exhaust all of the
cosmological truths.
>> BACHE: Yeah.
Oneness is a great truth.
I mean, it's a profound
truth because in oneness we
learn who we are, we
learn what we are.
But that doesn't
end the adventure.
First, there are many,
many levels of oneness
and different degrees
of intensity of oneness,
but it doesn't
end the adventure.
It's like a stage
in our process.
Yes, oneness is a
fundamental truth.
Yes, oneness is what we are.
But the adventure
that the divine is on,
the adventure of creation, the
adventure of 13.7 billion years
followed by how many more
hundreds of billion years, this
is a project which is much
larger than simply growing
a species to the point where
it can begin to understand
oneness, and then it stops?
No, it keeps going.
>> REGINA: It keeps going.
So we're not just
looking for that.
It's not over yet then.
OK.
We're going to move forward
then to session number 55
which you call the
great awakening.
Everything now for
humanity starts changing.
And now we're moving
into the future.
Let's talk about what you saw.
>> BACHE: This is--
I summarized all the
visions that I've
been given over many years
in one chapter called
"The Birth of the Future Human."
And this is visions going
back from '91 to '95,
so it's a long time ago.
And I was given many
visions that humanity
was coming to a turning point.
Humanity was coming to a radical
profound spiritual awakening
collectively, that we
were being taken into this
by the forces of evolution,
the forces of nature,
the forces of the divine.
And then in session
55, I experienced
how we would get there.
I experienced the death
and rebirth of humanity.
First, I dissolved into the
collective psyche which I had
done many times at that point.
And I was taken into deep time.
So I was taken into future time.
And there, not as Chris space
but as the human species.
I experienced, I began to
experience a profound collapse
of reality, a
profound convulsions
that the entire planet
was going through.
I experienced a radical loss
of all frames of reference,
a radical collapsing of all
structures, tremendous fear,
tremendous uncertainty, a
global systems crisis that
seemed to be generated
by a cascading
series of ecological crises.
Just bringing us to our knees to
the point where we were reduced
to simply trying to survive.
>> REGINA: I think a lot of
people are relating to that
right now, feeling
like, has that begun?
Has it begun?
It feels like things are
starting to disintegrate.
Everything that's been
known and familiar
is crumbling and corrupt
and not working anymore.
>> BACHE: Just the very
early stages of that process.
It's almost like an
overture to a symphony
and the scientists are telling
us very clearly what's ahead.
They're talking about
rising sea levels.
They're talking
about destabilization
of the environment.
They're talking
about massive hunger
with breakdown of
agricultural production.
I mean, we're going into one of
the most convulsive centuries
that the human race
has ever gone through.
Never have such crises affected
so many such large percentages
of the human race and
all at the same time.
This is going to be--
it's going to feel
like hell on Earth.
My experience though, was
that we moved through this.
We went through this.
And when we got on
the other side of it
and began to rebuild our
lives through this process,
we had been profoundly changed.
Everywhere, new
values, new estimates
of the good, new
social relationships,
a profound change
in human nature.
And I think what's
happening is it's not simply
a shift in our government, a
shift in economics or industry,
even a social shift,
but a shift that's
reaching so deep it changes
the fundamental architecture
of the collective psyche.
>> REGINA: One of the terms
you used that applies there is
a kind of a hyper-arousal
of the species mind.
>> BACHE: In session 55,
one of the things that went
into in great detail was
how could we possibly change
as much as we need to change as
quickly as we need to change?
How is this going to happen?
And it really focused on
the collective dynamics.
We have to understand the
collective-- the dynamics
of the collective species.
The collective species
mind is a field,
and we know what
physical fields do
when they're put under
enormous pressure, when
they are shoved into
non-equilibrium conditions.
They're capable of
tremendous creativity.
Small changes result in
enormous large outputs.
When the species
mind is energized
by the suffering of so many of
our children and grandchildren,
when so many people are
dying and so many people are
in great distress, the entire--
it's not just individuals
who are being impacted
but the entire species
mind is impacted.
And I think it will shove it
into something approximating
nonlinear conditions so
that we can learn something
about what might happen
in the species mind
by studying what happens
in physical systems
when they are shoved in
a nonlinear condition.
>> REGINA: And we become
very creative, humans do.
>> BACHE: Very
creative, very small--
I mean, the impact
of individual actions
can have enormous consequences.
Creativity can seemingly
out of nowhere,
but really coming out of the
foundation of our very being,
comes forward.
So this change that
we're going through
is going to take place much
faster than we could ever
imagine previously.
>> REGINA: Which is merciful.
>> BACHE: Which is merciful,
harsh and merciful,
and it will because of the
fundamental dynamics of that
are pushing it from an
underneath the level from
the collective psychic level,
it will be pushing us there.
>> REGINA: And you
say this almost--
this became kind of
like a crystal in death.
I mean, there's a
beauty in everything.
We think, oh death,
yeah, destruction.
But the fact is when we start
passing through that, that's
not what we're experiencing.
>> BACHE: No.
>> REGINA: And what you saw
is we just burst into this
sparkling light of these diamond
souls that have been given
birth to, that we
have transformed into.
>> BACHE: I don't know whether
this is going to happen
suddenly.
I don't know whether it's
going to be slow and gradual
as an historical progression.
I wasn't given any details
of the death process,
except the experience of it.
I wasn't given
details of the rebirth
except the quality of it.
So I don't know how it's
going to take place.
But I do think what is happening
is that nature is giving birth
to the diamond soul.
It's like gestation is long.
We've been gestating
the diamond soul
for thousands and
thousands of years.
Labor is short, it's intense,
it's dangerous, but it's short
and I think we are
entering a time of labor.
How long will it last?
I don't know.
I think generations.
But I think we do
come through it.
My experience is that we
do make it through it.
I have experienced
the future human.
And so for me, it's
not a probability
that it's going to
happen, it's a certainty
that it's going to happen.
>> REGINA: And you've seen this,
and other seers have seen this.
>> BACHE: They have.
>> REGINA: All of the great
beings that are communicating
through humanity at this
time all see that we are now
emerging into something of much
greater potential than what
we've been limited to.
It's like the governors and
limiters are coming off.
>> BACHE: Yeah.
>> REGINA: And so before we
wrap up the conversation,
believe it or not, I've
got 54 questions here,
we only took a handful.
I wanted to get to
this part and that
was what nirvana, the
way you describe nirvana
in the book, which is, as you
said before, it's not like we
just go to the right
hand of a cosmic force,
it's not as though we
float into oneness,
have to leave the planet
to be able to transform
and experience us.
You said, "nirvana
in every second.
Nirvana is paying
complete attention.
If you lose attention and
fall out of the moment,
suffering begins again."
>> BACHE: Yeah.
>> REGINA: Let's talk about that
because that's something each
and every one of us have
some ability or potential
to experience or manage
at this point in time.
>> BACHE: Wow, so
many layers to that.
>> REGINA: We've
got four minutes.
>> BACHE: Yeah.
[LAUGHS] Nirvana is
simply the experience
of what people refer to as
nirvana or enlightenment
or awakening, is
simply awakening
to the fundamental core
of our essential nature.
The nature that's
never been changed
from years before
this incarnation,
will never be changed after.
It is the fundamental nature
of our divine reality,
of our infinite reality.
And on top of that, within
that, our physical life emerges,
our personality emerges, our
individual awareness emerges.
If we're paying very
close attention,
one can experience one's
life as a dance of finite--
our finite life as a dance
on the infinite nature
of our essential nature.
If we stop paying
attention, then it's
like the infinite nature
disappears and we resume
and we're trapped again in the
finite structures of our life.
But then if we
just relax and tune
into that infinite
structure, it doesn't
dissolve those finite
structures but they
become transparent to that
infinite reality that's
always there underneath.
It was there the
moment we were born.
It doesn't change.
It's there the day that we die.
It's always there.
It's the nature of reality
that sustains all existence.
That to pay attention to it,
we don't create that reality,
we don't bring it into being.
We simply awaken to it's already
continuously existing presence.
And to learn to live
in that condition,
to learn to live with
both of those realities
leads to a deeper and
deeper integration
of the infinite and the finite.
And the qualities, it's
not just an awareness
but the power of the
infinite saturating
the structures of the finite.
The clarity, the compassion
of the infinite saturating
the structures of the finite.
That's where creation
is taking us.
>> REGINA: And that means being
aware and awake in the moment
instead of living in the past
and living in the future,
which I think according to
some neuroscientific studies,
humans do probably
90% of the time.
Either dreaming into the
future, fearing the future,
or fearing the past.
And missing these
precious moments
that are companionship
of our own soul
is guiding us to this,
all this divine kind
of timing happening to take
us into this conversation.
Lunch next with people,
all these things, and we're
looking at our
devices and thinking
of where we got to be
at the end of the day.
To me, it seems
that that's the part
we have to start gaining
some mastery over.
Be here.
>> BACHE: Yeah.
Yeah, just sort of settling into
the present because tomorrow
is just another series of
presents, of present moments.
It's all just a
series and it's not
going to be tomorrow is
present, it's not richer
than today's present.
It's always right here.
And it's also we either
tune into it or we miss it.
>> REGINA: And we don't
need to die for that.
Nirvana is right
here for the taking.
>> BACHE: Right here,
right now, yeah.
>> REGINA: Christopher,
thank you so much.
I mean, I so enjoyed your book.
I've shared it with
many, many people.
Many people watching
this are going
to want to look into
these experiences, too.
They're very richly
illustrated to the degree
that you can articulate
it with human words.
>> BACHE: Thank you, Regina.
>> REGINA: And again, I thank
you so much for your decades
of devotion.
And it took you another 20 years
before you decided that you
would share these experiences.
>> BACHE: Yeah.
>> REGINA: 20 years
of experience,
20 years on pause to decide
how to best bring this forward
and digest--
>> BACHE: To digest
them, to assimilate them.
Yeah, and then it took
me a long time just
to be able to share such
intimate experiences.
>> REGINA: Oh, yeah,
there's so much in there.
Some of it's so
deeply personal, we
didn't go into a lot of that.
So anyway, thank you again.
>> BACHE: Thank you, Regina.
>> REGINA: And I wish you the
best on your continued work
because I know you're sharing
and teaching people right now.
>> BACHE: Thank you.
>> REGINA: Again, the title of
the book is "LSD and The Mind
of the Universe," which I
consider to be an absolute
must-read book.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Open Minds.
[THEME MUSIC]